IBX-9846: Describe Embeddings search API (#3029)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/search/search_api.md

    `SearchService` is also used in the back office of [[= product_name =]], in components such as Universal Discovery Widget or Sub-items List.

> ### Perform a search

Author: ```suggestion
### Perform search
```

    `null` means that a range doesn't have an end.
    In the example all values above (and including) 60 are included in the last range.

See [Aggregation reference](aggregation_reference.md) for details of all available aggregations.

> ## Search with embeddings

Reviewer: As with Aggregation, let's mention that it's Solr/ES only

Embeddings are numerical representations that capture the meaning of text, images, or other content.

> Embeddings are generated by AI by converting words or documents into lists of numbers, instead of treating them as plain text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Embeddings are generated by converting words or documents into lists of numbers, instead of treating them as plain text.
```
Or "AI providers generate embeddings by..."

> Such lists, aka. vectors, can then be compared to find content with similar meaning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such lists, a.k.a. vectors, can then be compared to find content with similar meaning.
```

Searching with embeddings enables matching content based on meaning rather than exact text matches.
Instead of comparing keywords, the system compares vectors that represent the semantic meaning of content and the query input.

!!! note "Taxonomy suggestions"

>     Embedding queries have been introduced primarily to support the [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#taxonomy-suggestions) feature but you use them in other scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Embedding queries have been introduced primarily to support the [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#taxonomy-suggestions) feature but you can use them in other scenarios.
```

    To use them in other scenarios that use a custom embedding value type, implement matching embedding

> visitors for your search engine.

Reviewer: Wrong formatting

<img width="960" height="226" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7b41526b-6d77-4ec9-9550-8c53c1f7a90e" />

> Searching with embeddings can be combined with traditional search criteria and filters, which allows the semantic search to be constrained by content type, location, permissions, or other search criteria.

Reviewer 2: a little bit misleading. `EmbeddingQuery` doesn’t support query criteria, only filter. Maybe `can be combined with filters (Criterion) ...`

> Searching with embeddings can be combined with filtering, which allows the semantic search results to be constrained by content type, location, permissions, or other criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can combine searching with embeddings with filtering, which allows the semantic search results to be constrained by content type, location, permissions, or other criteria.
```

To avoid the passive voice?
How does one filter by permissions, I don't think we support that?
It would be useful to link to the criteria that can be used here.

We're using the `findContent` method, and mention content search exclusively - can the query be used with location search as well? These would allow to constraint by location

Reviewer: Note: embeddings are content search only, but allow filtering by location (see https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/3029#discussion_r2916660839 )

> The object encapsulates the vector to search for, along with configuration such as the embedding model and similarity threshold.

Reviewer 2: `EmbeddingQuery` has no model or threshold fields. It only has embedding, filter, limit/offset, aggregations, performCount.

> An embedding query is represented by the `Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery` value object.

Reviewer: PHP API link would be nice.

The object encapsulates the embedding used for similarity search and optional search parameters such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting.
The query is validated before being executed to ensure that the embedding configuration is consistent with the system setup.

The following components are used to build and validate embedding-based queries:

- [EmbeddingQuery](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html):

>     Represents a semantic similarity search request.

Reviewer: Do we need the `: `? This is not a pattern that was used in the doc previously, ever.

```suggestion
- [EmbeddingQuery](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html) represents a semantic similarity search request.
```

>     It contains the input vector and optional search parameters such as such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It contains the input vector and optional search parameters such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting
```

- [EmbeddingQueryBuilder](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQueryBuilder.html):
    A fluent builder for constructing `EmbeddingQuery` instances.

>     It helps construct queries consistently and integrates embedding queries with the search query pipeline, but you must still provide the required embedding value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It helps construct queries consistently and integrates embedding queries with the search query pipeline.
    You must provide the required embedding value by using the `withEmbedding` method.
```

- [QueryValidatorInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-QueryValidatorInterface.html):
    Validates embedding query structure before execution.

>     The provider/model configuration and vector compatibility are resolved at runtime by the configured embedding and search engine component

Reviewer: How is that related to the QueryValidator?

Reviewer 2: You're right. That second sentence is not really about the `QueryValidatorInterface`. QueryValidatorInterface is about validating the query structure before execution. Provider or model resolution and vector compatibility are runtime concerns handled elsewhere, so mentioning them here mixes responsibilities and makes the description less clear.
I would keep this section focused on structural validation and move the runtime and provider note to a more appropriate place, such as the execution flow or embedding runtime behavior section.

Author: Does the runtime validation include validating vector dimensionality and selecting the correct indexed field for similarity search?

Reviewer 2: `QueryValidatorInterface` is responsible for validating the query structure before execution. Vector dimensionality and similarity field selection are runtime concerns. They are handled later in the execution path. Field selection is determined by the configured embedding model and backend specific query mapping. Vector dimensionality is only effectively validated when the query reaches the search engine. Those checks are not performed by QueryValidatorInterface.

Author: @mikadamczyk Thank you!

### Use embedding queries in search

Embedding queries are executed through the search API in the same way as other search requests.
You build an `EmbeddingQuery` instance by using a builder and pass it to the search service.
Embedding queries can also be combined with filters and search criteria to narrow down results, such as by content type, location, or permissions.

``` php
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQueryBuilder;

> use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Embedding;

Reviewer 2: no such thing like `Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Embedding`, maybe you were thinking about `use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Embedding;`

But `Embedding` is abstract and expects `float[]`, so this snippet won’t compile
```suggestion
use Ibexa\Contracts\Taxonomy\Search\Query\Value\TaxonomyEmbedding
```

> use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Aggregation;

Reviewer 2: `Aggregation` is an interface, cannot be instantiated

> Embedding queries can also be combined with filters to narrow down results, such as by content type, location, or permissions.

Reviewer: How to filter by permissions?

Reviewer 2: The idea was "Embedding queries can also be combined with filters to narrow down results, for example, by content type or location. Repository search also respects the permissions of the current user.

Reviewer: One thing that's not clear for me from this PR if embeddings can be used only for content search or for location search as well.

The example shows content search only, the taxonomy index is created only for content index (https://github.com/ibexa/taxonomy/blob/main/src/lib/Event/Subscriber/TaxonomyEmbeddingIndexDataSubscriber.php#L28) - I'm just not sure if locations are supported

Reviewer: I think it's:

1) You cannot use Location search (https://github.com/ibexa/core/blob/main/src/contracts/Repository/SearchService.php#L191) because EmbeddingQuery does not inherit from LocationQuery

2) Anyway, you still can filter by location, because content search supports a couple of location criteria (https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/search/criteria_reference/search_criteria_reference/#search-criteria)

// Create an embedding object that represents the search input

> $embedding = new Embedding('Find content similar to this text');

Reviewer 2: This class accepts     
```
    /**
     * @param float[] $value
     */
    public function __construct(array $value)
    {
        $this->value = $value;
    }
```

> // ...

Reviewer: Let's just embed the full Command here - it's easier for us to maintain, and the result is less confusing

Because it's hard to say what's happening here:
<img width="873" height="257" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dbc2d1b4-23ed-4980-907f-aa5135656fe6" />

// Build the embedding query by using the fluent builder
$embeddingQuery = EmbeddingQueryBuilder::create()
    ->withEmbedding($embedding)
    ->setLimit(10)              // maximum number of results
    ->setOffset(0)              // result offset for pagination
    ->setPerformCount(true)     // optionally count total matching items

>     ->setAggregations([

Reviewer 2: we could remove aggregations from the snippet (focus on embeddings) or:
```
      ->setAggregations([
          new ContentTypeTermAggregation('count_by_type'),
      ])
```

> This example shows how to encapsulate an embedding query inside a reusable service class:

Reviewer: I'd just remove this example, the reader will know that they can wrap this logic with their own helper.

// ...
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/public_php_api/src/Service/TaxonomyEmbeddingSearchService.php', 10, 15) =]]
// ...
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/public_php_api/src/Service/TaxonomyEmbeddingSearchService.php', 16, 18) =]]
// ...
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/public_php_api/src/Service/TaxonomyEmbeddingSearchService.php', 25, 36) =]]
```

The `EmbeddingQueryBuilder` ensures that the query is correctly configured before execution.

!!! note "Embedding query properties"

>     Embedding queries do not allow standard Query properties such as `query`, `sortClauses`, `facetBuilders`, or `spellcheck`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Embedding queries do not allow standard Query properties such as `query`, `sortClauses`, or `spellcheck`.
```

### Embedding configuration and providers

Models used to resolve embedding queries must be configured in [system configuration](configuration.md).
Each key defines the model's name, vector dimensionality, the field suffix used in the search index, and the embedding provider that generates vectors.

> ``` yaml

Reviewer: I'd mention here:
1) The `default_embedding_model` property
2) That the `field_suffix` must be unique for each model

Reviewer 2: It could be:
Models used to resolve embedding queries must be configured in [system configuration](configuration.md). Each entry defines the model name, vector dimensionality, the field suffix used in the search index, and the embedding provider that generates vectors. The default model is selected through `default_embedding_model`. Each model must use a unique `field_suffix`, as it becomes part of the indexed field name.`

ibexa:
  system:
    default:
      embedding_models:
        text-embedding-3-small:
          name: 'text-embedding-3-small'
          dimensions: 1536
          field_suffix: '3small'

>           embedding_provider: 'ibexa_openai'

Reviewer: Please remember that for 4.6, connector-ai is an LTS update (optional) - and this info needs to be added.

```

For a real-life example of embedding configuration, see [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#change-the-embedding-generation-model).

Embedding providers implement the contract for generating vector representations of input data.

> At runtime, the system resolves right provider and assigns embedding generation to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At runtime, the system resolves the default provider responsible for generating embeddings.
```
> assigns embedding generation to it

just sounds too complicated to me.

Also, you can use the default provider, or request a specific provider (by using https://github.com/ibexa/core/blob/v5.0.6/src/lib/Search/Embedding/EmbeddingProviderResolver.php#L44 )

> - [EmbeddingConfigurationInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingConfigurationInterface.html) defines how embedding models are configured in the system (model name, vector dimensionality, provider reference, field suffix)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EmbeddingConfigurationInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingConfigurationInterface.html) represents the embedding models configuration in the system (model name, vector dimensionality, provider reference, field suffix)
```

The configuration is specified (defined) in YAML, this class "just" allows to read it.

- [EmbeddingProviderInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderInterface.html) is the runtime contract for generating vector representations from text or other inputs

- [EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface.html) lists all available embedding providers

- [EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface.html) determines which provider should be used for a given embedding configuration

### Embedding fields

Embedding vectors are stored in dedicated search fields that are created by `Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\FieldType\EmbeddingFieldFactory`.

> These fields are then used by the search engine to perform vector similarity comparisons when embedding queries are executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fields can be used by the search engine to perform vector similarity comparisons when embedding queries are executed.
```

Just creating the fields does nothing, and they are not stored anywhere. To actually store them, you need to expand the index (see the other comment about this)

> ``` php

Reviewer: Please extract to a separate code sample

use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\FieldType\EmbeddingFieldFactory;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingConfigurationInterface;

// $config is an existing EmbeddingConfigurationInterface

> $factory = new EmbeddingFieldFactory($config);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/** @var \Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingConfigurationInterface $config */
$factory = new EmbeddingFieldFactory($config);
```

`EmbeddingFieldFactory` is a Symfony service, is it even meant to be instantiated directly?

Reviewer 2: Good point. But for me, direct instantiation is acceptable in isolated examples or tests; in application code, `EmbeddingFieldFactory` is definitely intended to be used as a Symfony service. If we want a full example it will be something like:
```
<?php

  declare(strict_types=1);

  namespace App\Example;

  use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\FieldType\EmbeddingField;
  use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\FieldType\EmbeddingFieldFactory;

  final readonly class ExampleService
  {
      public function __construct(
          private EmbeddingFieldFactory $embeddingFieldFactory,
      ) {
      }

      public function createDefaultField(): EmbeddingField
      {
          return $this->embeddingFieldFactory->create();
      }

      public function createCustomField(): EmbeddingField
      {
          return $this->embeddingFieldFactory->create('custom_embedding_type');
      }
  }
```
And then describe the result separately:
```
$defaultField = $exampleService->createDefaultField();
$defaultField->getType(); // e.g. "ibexa_dense_vector_gemini_embedding_001_1536_dv"

$customField = $exampleService->createCustomField();
$customField->getType(); // "custom_embedding_type"
```
This is only a good example of how the factory works. It is not a good example of taxonomy-specific indexing logic, because taxonomy sometimes needs an explicit type based on the taxonomy model suffix.

> // Create a default embedding field (type derived from config suffix)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create a default embedding field (type derived from configuration's field suffix)
```

$embeddingField = $factory->create();

> echo $embeddingField->getType(); // for example, "ibexa_dense_vector_model_123"

Reviewer: Should the example match one of the fields defined in:
https://github.com/ibexa/solr/blob/96022e7f6993fade128054f25cc35b3446ef75e7/src/lib/Resources/config/solr/managed-schema.xml#L157-L167

as, indicated in the comment here: https://github.com/ibexa/core/blob/d01b203204e4f9bc3bdaced92ade82eff0afbdd3/src/contracts/Search/FieldType/EmbeddingField.php#L21C75-L21C100

?

// Create a custom embedding field with a specific type
$customField = $factory->create('custom_embedding_type');
echo $customField->getType(); // "custom_embedding_type"
```

> For more information, see [Embeddings reference](embeddings_reference.md).

Reviewer: I'd link to https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/search/extensibility/index_custom_elasticsearch_data/ here (I don't see an example for Solr right now).

Once you have the field, you have to listen to the indexing event (ContentIndexCreateEvent) and actually attach it to the index

Author: The only thing about adding custom fields to Solrcan be found here:
https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/search/extensibility/solr_document_field_mappers/
where a field mapper is used to add a `parent_name` field to the index.

    `null` means that a range doesn't have an end.
    In the example all values above (and including) 60 are included in the last range.

See [Aggregation reference](aggregation_reference.md) for details of all available aggregations.

## Search with embeddings

Embeddings are numerical representations that capture the meaning of text, images, or other content.
Embeddings are generated by AI by converting words or documents into lists of numbers, instead of treating them as plain text.
Such lists, aka vectors, can then be compared to find content with similar meaning.

Searching with embeddings enables matching content based on meaning rather than exact text matches.
Instead of comparing keywords, the system compares vectors that represent the semantic meaning of content and the query input.

!!! note "Taxonomy suggestions"

    Embedding queries have been introduced primarily to support the [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#taxonomy-suggestions) feature but you can use them in other scenarios.

>     

Author: ```suggestion

```

Searching with embeddings can be combined with filtering, which allows the semantic search results to be constrained by content type, location, permissions, or other criteria.

An embedding query is represented by the `Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery` value object.
The object encapsulates the embedding used for similarity search and optional search parameters such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting.
The query is validated before being executed to ensure that the embedding configuration is consistent with the system setup.

The following components are used to build and validate embedding-based queries:

- [EmbeddingQuery](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html):
    Represents a semantic similarity search request.
    It contains the input vector and optional search parameters such as such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting

- [EmbeddingQueryBuilder](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQueryBuilder.html):
    A fluent builder for constructing `EmbeddingQuery` instances.

>     It enforces required parameters and integrates embedding queries with the search query pipeline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It helps construct queries consistently and integrates embedding queries with the search query pipeline, but you must still provide the required embedding value
```

- [QueryValidatorInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-QueryValidatorInterface.html):
    Validates embedding queries before they are passed to the search engine.

>     Implementations ensure that the embedding model exists and that vector dimensions match the configured embedding field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Validates embedding query structure before execution. 
    Provider/model configuration and vector compatibility are resolved at runtime by the configured embedding and search engine components
```

### Use embedding queries in search

Embedding queries are executed through the search API in the same way as other search requests.
You build an `EmbeddingQuery` instance by using a builder and pass it to the search service.
Embedding queries can also be combined with filters to narrow down results, such as by content type, location, or permissions.

``` php
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQueryBuilder;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Embedding;

// Example embedding vector (float[])
$vector = [
    0.0123,
    -0.9876,
    0.4567,
    // ...
];

// Create an Embedding instance with a float[] vector
$embedding = new Embedding($vector);

// Build the embedding query with the fluent builder
$embeddingQuery = EmbeddingQueryBuilder::create()
    ->withEmbedding($embedding)
    ->setLimit(10)          // maximum number of results
    ->setOffset(0)          // result offset for pagination
    ->setPerformCount(true) // optionally count total matching items

>     ->build();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQueryBuilder;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Criterion\ContentTypeIdentifier;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Taxonomy\Search\Query\Value\TaxonomyEmbedding;

$vector = [
  0.0123,
  -0.9876,
  0.4567,
  ...
];

$embedding = new TaxonomyEmbedding($vector);

$embeddingQuery = EmbeddingQueryBuilder::create()
  ->withEmbedding($embedding)
  ->setFilter(new ContentTypeIdentifier('article'))
  ->setLimit(10)
  ->setOffset(0)
  ->setPerformCount(true)
  ->build();
```

// Execute the query via the repository

> $results = $repository->findContent($embeddingQuery);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Repository;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\SearchService;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQueryBuilder;
use Ibexa\Contracts\Taxonomy\Search\Query\Value\TaxonomyEmbedding;

final class ExampleService
  {
      private SearchService $searchService;

      public function __construct(Repository $repository)
      {
          $this->searchService = $repository->getSearchService();
      }

      public function searchByEmbedding(array $vector): void
      {
          $query = EmbeddingQueryBuilder::create()
              ->withEmbedding(new TaxonomyEmbedding($vector))
              ->setLimit(10)
              ->setOffset(0)
              ->build();

          $result = $this->searchService->findContent($query);

          foreach ($result->searchHits as $hit) {
              // ...
          }
      }
  }

```

    `null` means that a range doesn't have an end.
    In the example all values above (and including) 60 are included in the last range.

See [Aggregation reference](aggregation_reference.md) for details of all available aggregations.

## Search with embeddings

!!! caution "Feature support"

>     Search with embeddings is only available with the Solr and Elasticsearch search engines.

Reviewer: I think it's only supported with Solr9?

V5 supports both Solr 8 and Solr 9, I think only 9 supports embedding search

Please see this:
https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/content_management/taxonomy/taxonomy/#enable-taxonomy-suggestions

> [Search engine](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/search/search_engines/search_engines/): Taxonomy suggestions require a search engine that supports vector search. The feature has been tested to work with Elasticsearch or Solr 9.8.1+.

    
Embeddings are numerical representations that capture the meaning of text, images, or other content.
AI providers generate embeddings by converting words or documents into lists of numbers, instead of treating them as plain text.
Such lists, aka vectors, can then be compared to find content with similar meaning.

Searching with embeddings enables matching content based on meaning rather than exact text matches.
Instead of comparing keywords, the system compares vectors that represent the semantic meaning of content and the query input.

!!! note "Taxonomy suggestions"

    Embedding queries have been introduced primarily to support the [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#taxonomy-suggestions) feature, therefore embedding search integration is provided for `TaxonomyEmbedding`.

You can narrow down the search results, for example, by content type or location.
To do this, combine searching with embeddings with filters.
Repository search also respects the permissions of the current user.

> An embedding query is represented by the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html)` value object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An embedding query is represented by the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html) value object.
```

The object encapsulates the embedding used for similarity search and optional search parameters such as filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting.

### Use embedding queries in search

Embedding queries are executed through the search API in the same way as other search requests.
You build an `EmbeddingQuery` instance by using a builder and pass it to the search service.

This example shows a minimal embedding query executed directly through the search service:

> ``` php

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``` php hl_lines="39-40 42-48 50"
```

> // ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
There's nothing above that in the code sample, let's skip this
